public: yes
tags: [meta]
day-order: 1
summary: |
  What is this and why might I care?

What is Immersedcode?
=====================

Hey potential reader.  In case you are reading `my other blog
<http://lucumr.pocoo.org/>`__ you might know that my other current
obsession besides Python is game and graphics development.  However
because I realize that this is not in line with what my regular blog
reader is interested in I decided to spin of a separate blog for this kind
of stuff.

What will this blog be about?  My first year of doing this kind of stuff
was actually surprisingly painful.  Not only because it's a way more
complex problem area than what I do usually, but also because a lot of the
stuff you find online is not necessarily up to date or not necessarily a
good way to get started.  I learned a bunch of stuff, but mostly I learned
how not to do things.

Currently there seems to be the trend that if you want to get started with
game development you pick some high levelish thing like XNA or Unity3D and
ignore how things work internally.  Unfortunately that's not the way I
like to approach things so I went the painful route of getting started at
the very bottom.  That's all fine and useful when it comes to finding
literature on the math involved and that sort of stuff, but there does not
seem to be a lot of information of how the individual pieces might fit
together.  On top of that, even if you want to get started at the very
bottom there are a bunch of things you only want to do once to understand
them and then promptly replace it with something tested (vectors and
matrixes come to mind).

This blog will collect links to useful pieces of information, articles and
code snippets that I would like to have known before I started my
adventure in the hope that someone else will find it useful.

As with my regular blog there is no way to leave comments, but please be
so kind and send me a mail if you want to share some feedback and I will
do my very best to incorporate it.
